FINAL RULES: 23-4

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: April 14, 1967 (Volume 32, Number 72)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 5984]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 8092

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT HEADING: Performance of Lazy Eights and Chandelles in Normal Category Airplanes

 
        
ACTION: Final Rule

 
        
SUMMARY: The purpose of this amendment to Sec. 23.3 of the Federal Aviation Regulations is to make it clear that lazy eights and chandelles, as well as turns, in which the angle of bank is not more than 60 degrees may be performed in normal category airplanes.

 

 
        
DATES: EFFECTIVE DATE: April 14, 1967.

 
        
EFFECTIVE DATE: 1967-04-14

 
        
TERMINATION DATE: 

 
        
ADDRESSES: 

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Under present Sec. 23.3 normal category airplanes are limited to maneuvers incident to normal flying, to certain stalls, and to turns in which the angle of bank is not more than 60 degrees. Lazy eights and chandelles are referred to only in connection with utility category airplanes. The regulation is not clear as to whether lazy eights and chandelles in which the angle of bank is not more than 60 degrees are permitted in normal category airplanes.

 In the past, operators offering flight training generally used training aircraft which were certificated in the utility category for limited acrobatics. However, at the present time many aircraft dealers and distributors are offering flight instruction and desire to use the airplanes for which they are dealers or distributors rather than acquire training aircraft for that specific purpose only. Moreover, many private owners who are interested in obtaining commercial, instrument or flight instructor certificates and ratings desire to use their own airplanes for the necessary flight training.

 The FAA considers that lazy eights and chandelles executed with turns involving an angle of bank no greater than 60 degrees would satisfy all the necessary requisites for pilot training. Furthermore, the FAA believes that safety in general aviation would be enhanced if such training could be facilitated and made readily available to all pilots.

 Limiting the chandelles and lazy eights to an angle of bank no greater than 60 degrees would result in load factors on the airplane well within the minimum limit maneuvering load factors prescribed for normal category airplanes. Moreover, the basic controllability and other flight characteristic requirements under which normal category airplanes are type certificated ensure that lazy eights and chandelles involving an angle of bank of not more than 60 degrees can be safely performed.

 Since this amendment is clarifying in nature and imposes no additional burden on any person, the FAA finds that notice and public procedure on this amendment are unnecessary and that good cause exists for making it effective on less than 30 days notice.

(Secs. 313(a), 601, 603, Federal Aviation Act of 1958; 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1421, 1423)

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: In consideration of the foregoing, paragraphs (a) and (b) of Sec. 23.3 of the Federal Aviation Regulations are amended to read as follows, effective upon publication in the Federal Register.

Sec. 23.3 Airplane categories.

 (a) The normal category is limited to airplanes intended for nonacrobatic operation. Nonacrobatic operation includes--

 (1) Any maneuver incident to normal flying;

 (2) Stalls (except whip stalls); and 

 (3) Lazy eights, chandelles, and steep turns, in which the angle of bank is not more than 60 degrees.

 (b) The utility category is limited to airplanes intended for limited acrobatic operation. Airplanes certificated in the utility category may be used in any of the operations covered under paragraph (a) of this section and in limited acrobatic operation included--

 (1) Spins (if approved for the particular type of airplane); and

 (2) Lazy eights, chandelles, and steep turns, in which the angle of bank is more than 60 degrees.

 * * * * *

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Washington, DC, on April 7, 1967.

William F. McKee,

Administrator.

[FR Doc. 67-4069 Filed 4-13-67; 8:45 am]

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.

 
        
FINAL RULE ACTIONS: Not Applicable.