[[Page 1]]
13642 Federal Register / Vol. 61,
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
Federal Aviation Administration
14 CFR Part 23
[Docket No. 28011; Amendment No. 23–52]
RIN 2120–AF41
Powerplant Instruments; Fuel Pressure
Indication
AGENCY: Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), DOT.
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: This document amends the
certification requirement for fuel
pressure indicators on pump-fed
engines of normal, utility, acrobatic, and
commuter category airplanes to permit
regulatory alternatives to fuel pressure
indicators to warn pilots of fuel system
problems. A fuel pressure indicator is
not technically the only means available
to the pilot of indicating a fuel system
problem. The amendment allows
airplanes to be certificated with a means
that indicates fuel flow or that monitors
the fuel system and warns the pilot of
any fuel flow trend that could lead to
engine failure. New technology
incorporated as a means of compliance
with the revised rule could improve
engine operation and reduce airplane
operating costs.
EFFECTIVE DATE: July 25, 1996.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:
J. Lowell Foster, Aerospace Engineer,
Standards Office, Small Airplane
Directorate, Aircraft Certification
Service, Federal Aviation
Administration, 601 East 12th Street,
Kansas City, Missouri 64106; telephone
(816) 426–5688.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background
Statement of the Problem
The FAA proposed to amend Title 14
of the Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR), Part 23, § 23.1305(b)(4), which
required a fuel pressure indicator for
each pump-fed engine. The pressure
indicator gives continuous fuel pressure
readings to the pilot. This information
provides an advance warning of engine
failure only when a pilot notices the
pressure reading has deviated from the
norm and when the pilot can diagnose
what those deviations mean in terms of
potential engine failure. The change
would allow the options of a fuel
pressure indicator, a fuel flow indicator,
or a means that continuously monitors
the fuel system and warns the pilot of
any fuel flow trend that could cause
engine failure. A fuel flow indicator
No. 60 / Wednesday, March 27, 1996
would give continuous fuel flow
readings to the pilot. Fuel flow
information presents the fuel system
status to the pilot in a manner similar
to the fuel pressure indicator, but it also
allows the pilot to quickly assess the
engine’s performance during critical
phases of flight, such as takeoff. A
continuous fuel system monitoring
device would alert the pilot to any fuel
flow trend that could lead to engine
failure.
History
The Aircraft Owners and Pilots
Association (AOPA) petitioned the FAA
for new standards that would allow, on
all pump-fed engines, a fuel flow system
employing a differential pressure
transducer to be accepted as a means of
compliance equivalent to the current
fuel pressure indicator requirements (55
FR 39299, September 26, 1990). The
FAA requested that the Aviation
Rulemaking Advisory Committee
(ARAC) review the petition and
recommend a course of action. In
January 1992, the Fuel Pressure
Indicators Working Group of the ARAC
on General Aviation and Business
Airplane Issues began a review of the
AOPA’s petition. As a result of the
review, a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (NPRM), Notice No. 94–37,
was published on December 28, 1994
(59 FR 67114).
Discussion of Comments
General
This amendment is based on the
NPRM, Notice No. 94–37, published
December 28, 1994 (59 FR 67114).
Interested persons were invited to
participate in the development of this
final rule by submitting written data,
views, or arguments to the regulatory
docket on or before February 27, 1995.
Four comments were received on the
proposal, including a letter of support
from the Air Line Pilots Association.
The intent of the fuel pressure
indicator requirement for pump-fed
engines is to advise the pilot of a fuel
pressure deficiency before total engine
failure. The term ‘‘indicator’’ in
§ 23.1305(b)(4) implies that the fuel
pressure be constantly displayed.
The FAA proposed a change to allow
a fuel pressure indicator or a fuel flow
indicator. The fuel flow indicator would
constantly display information that the
pilot could use to evaluate engine
power, fuel mixture, and other engine
performance factors in addition to fuel
system status. It is technologically
possible to have a microprocessor that
monitors engine operation and triggers a
warning if the fuel system operation
/ Rules and Regulations
does not match the other monitored
engine trends; therefore, the FAA also
proposed to change the rule to accept a
means that monitors the fuel system and
warns the pilot of any fuel flow trend
that could lead to engine failure.
Accordingly, the FAA proposed to
adopt a performance standard, instead
of a requirement for specific equipment.
An applicant could show compliance
with paragraph (b) of the proposal by
using any design that monitors the fuel
system and warns the pilot of any fuel
flow trend that could lead to engine
failure.
Discussion of Comments to Section
23.1305
One commenter, a private individual,
does not feel that § 23.1305(b)(4) should
be changed as proposed. The
commenter believes that ‘‘an accurate
indication is necessary for the pilot to
have a situation awareness of his
operating environment.’’ The FAA
understands and agrees with the overall
basis for the comment; however, the
FAA does not agree with all of the
commenter’s arguments and will
address them individually.
First, the commenter believes the
proposal implies that small airplane
engines are ‘‘antiquated’’ using
‘‘antiquated fuel flow means.’’ The
NPRM sections discussing the history of
this rule focused on fuel pump
reliability, radial engines, and
diagnosing fuel pump failures, which
were more frequent in the 1940’s and
1950’s than today. The FAA’s intention
in discussing the rule’s history was to
point out that the reliability of fuel
pumps has improved since the 1940’s.
The FAA did not intend to imply that
these engines were in some way
‘‘antiquated.’’ In fact, as the commenter
points out, the basic engines used on
most small airplanes are derivatives of
the engines designed in the 1940’s. Civil
Air Regulation 3 airplanes, which
constitute over 85 percent of the
existing small airplanes flying today,
have an excellent service history.
The commenter also points out that
‘‘continual reference to automobile
monitoring systems is well taken, except
that automobiles can have a problem
and pull off to the side of the road.’’
Additionally, ‘‘[a]utomobiles may have
indicator lights and warnings as to the
state of fule consumption, but they also
have a fuel quantity gauge so the driver
can monitor the system in use to also
determine an accurate fuel flow.’’ The
FAA used the reference to automobile
technology to make the point that
sophisticated engine monitoring is
inexpensive enough to be mass
produced for automobiles. Complex fuel

[[Page 2]]
Federal Register / Vol. 61,
monitoring systems are available in
business jets and recently-certificated jet
transport aircraft. This technology may
soon be affordable to small airplane
owners and manufacturers, and the FAA
does not want to impede progress with
rules offering no alternatives.
The commenter believes that the
proposal would allow ‘‘idiot lights.’’ On
the contrary, the FAA stated in the
NPRM, ‘‘A light that comes on at the
same time that the engine quits is
useless. A warning light system that
would comply with this proposal would
be sophisticated enough to read
transients and trends, and would give a
useful warning to the pilot.’’ Also, the
rule as proposed would require that any
warning light system continuously
monitor the fuel system and warn the
pilot of any fuel flow trend that could
lead to an engine failure.
Transport Canada questions the
ability to show compliance with the
requirement in § 23,1549 to identify
maximum and, if applicable, minimum
safe operating limits as well as the
normal operating range of the
instrument. This commenter points out
that the typical fuel flow meter is a
digital type, and it would be difficult for
the applicant to provide equivalent
markings, Engine manufacturers provide
the information required by § 23.1549,
which is then usually transcribed to the
installed fuel pressure gauge. It appears
that this information would not be
presented through the use of typical
digital fuel flow meters. The commenter
offers the following suggestion: ‘‘FAR
23.1549 was written with a traditional
dial instrument in mind where the
engine limitations could be easily
displayed on the face of the unit and
monitored by the crew. To allow flow
meters or other fuel system monitors to
satisfy the requirements of § 23.1549
where such a gauge no longer exists,
compliance could be shown by (1)
different colors to indicate changing
trends in system performance (e.g.,
amber color for a low pressure/flow
condition, red for impending engine
failure), or (2) placarding, if appropriate,
to indicate the normal and abnormal
operating ranges.’’
The FAA agrees with the commenter’s
suggestions as an acceptable means of
compliance with § 23.1549. Suggested
items (1) and (2) above offer the pilot a
means to determine fuel flow
limitations, which may be needed if a
fuel flow meter is installed.
A commenter from Australia supports
the proposal; however, the commenter
feels that the proposed text would
require a monitoring system that
provides a warning of any trend that
could lead to engine failure, which is an
No. 60 / Wednesday, March 27, 1996
extremely difficult compliance
requirement. The commenter further
states: ‘‘The historic requirement, and
the NRPM preamble, clearly addresses
fuel pressure (as an indication of the
availability of fuel flow) or fuel flow
only. Such wording may stifle the
development of monitoring
instrumentation for small airplanes.’’
The commenter suggests that, for
clarification, the proposed text for
§ 23.1305(b)(4)(ii), be amended to read
as follows: ‘‘That continuously monitors
the fuel system and warns the pilot of
any fuel flow trend that could lead to
engine failure.’’
The FAA agrees with the commenter
that the proposed wording may be too
broad, making compliance difficult or
the system unnecessarily complex. The
FAA encourages ‘‘smart’’ systems;
however, the intent of the proposal was
to warn the pilot of any fuel flow trend
and, for that reason, the final rule and
the preamble adopt the commenter’s
language.
Section 23.1305 is adopted with the
change in paragraph (b)(4)(ii) to add the
words ‘‘fuel flow’’ before the word
‘‘trend.’’
International Compatibility
The agency has reviewed
corresponding International Civil
Aviation Organization international
standards and recommended practices
and Joint Aviation Authorities
requirements for compatibility. The
FAA has determined that this final rule,
if adopted, would not present any
differences.
Paperwork Reduction Act
In accordance with the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1990 (44 U.S.C. 3501
et seq.), there are no reporting or
recordkeeping requirements associated
with this rule.
Regulatory Evaluation Summary
Economic Evaluation, Regulatory
Flexibility Determination, and Trade
Impact Assessment
Proposed changes to federal
regulations must undergo several
economic analyses. First, Executive
Order 12866 directs Federal agencies to
promulgate new regulations or modify
existing regulations only if the potential
benefits to society outweigh the
potential costs. Second, the Regulatory
Flexibility Act of 1980 requires agencies
to analyze the economic impact of
regulatory changes on small entities.
Finally, the Office of Management and
Budget directs agencies to assess the
effects of regulatory changes on
international trade. In conducting these
/ Rules and Regulations 13643
analyses, the FAA has determined that
this rule: (1) will generate benefits
exceeding its costs and is not significant
as defined in Executive Order 12866; (2)
is not significant as defined in DOT’s
Policies and Procedures; (3) will not
have a significant economic impact on
small entities; and (4) will not affect
international trade. These analyses,
available in the docket, are summarized
below.
Economic Evaluation
The rule adopts a performance
standard instead of requiring specific
equipment. In this way, manufacturers
can develop any design that monitors
the fuel system and warns the pilot of
any fuel flow trend that could lead to
engine failure. The objective of
imposing a performance standard could
be met in this case by any means that
‘‘continuously indicates to the pilot fuel
pressure or fuel flow, or that
continuously monitors the fuel system
and warns the pilot of any fuel flow
trend that could lead to engine failure.’’
This will maintain the level of safety
intended by the original requirement,
without imposing any additional costs.
For example, a warning light system
could possibly alert the pilot sooner
than if the pilot relied on an instrument
panel scan to notice a trend in the fuel
pressure indication alone (as is
currently the case).
A fuel flow indicator offers additional
benefits compared to a fuel pressure
indicator in that it enables the pilot to
monitor the engine’s fuel consumption
and compare it to fuel consumption
listed in the airplane flight manual.
Consequently, engine operation could
be improved, resulting in reduced fuel
consumption and operating costs. In
addition, continual fuel flow readings
are useful during critical phases of
flight, such as takeoff and climb. Thus,
flight safety could be enhanced. The
other alternative, a means to
continuously monitor the fuel system,
will also enhance safety by alerting the
pilot to any fuel flow trend that could
lead to engine failure.
Since the rule will permit but not
require alternative means of warning
pilots of fuel system problems, it is
inherently cost-beneficial. To the extent
that it encourages the future
development and utilization of
comprehensive engine control,
monitoring, and diagnostic systems, it
will generate benefits in the form of
enhanced safety, improved fuel
efficiency, power output, and engine
life.

[[Page 3]]
13644 Federal Register / Vol. 61,
Regulatory Flexibility Determination
The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980
(RFA) was enacted by Congress to
ensure that small entities are not
unnecessarily and disproportionately
burdened by government regulations.
The RFA requires a Regulatory
Flexibility Analysis if a proposed or
final rule would have a significant
economic impact, either detrimental or
beneficial, on a substantial number of
small entities. FAA Order 2100.14A,
Regulatory Flexibility Criteria and
Guidance, prescribes standards for
complying with RFA requirements in
FAA rulemaking actions. The Order
defines ‘‘small entities’’ in terms of size,
‘‘significant economic impact’’ in terms
of annualized costs, and ‘‘substantial
number’’ as a number which is not less
than eleven and which is more than
one-third of the small entities subject to
a proposed of final rule.
The rule will affect manufacturers of
future part 23 airplanes. For
manufacturers, Order 2100.14A defines
a small entity as one with 75 or fewer
employees and a significant economic
impact as annualized costs of $19,000 or
more. The FAA has determined that the
rule will not have a significant
economic impact on a substantial
number of small manufacturers since
the annualized certification costs of the
rule are less than $19,000.
International Trade Impact Assessment
The rule will not constitute a barrier
to international trade, including the
export of U.S. airplanes and airplane
parts to foreign markets or the import of
foreign airplanes and airplane parts in
the United States.
Federalism Implications
The regulations herein will not have
substantial direct effects on the States,
No. 60 / Wednesday, March 27, 1996
on the relationship between the national
government and the States, or on the
distribution of power and
responsibilities among the various
levels of government. Therefore, in
accordance with Executive Order 12612,
it is determined that this regulation will
not have sufficient federalism
implications to warrant the preparation
of a Federalism Assessment.
Conclusion
The FAA amends the airworthiness
standards to allow airplane
manufacturers to utilize new technology
for fuel system monitoring to improve
the operation and economy of part 23
airplanes powered by pump-fed
engines. The current rule requires a fuel
pressure indication; thus, it limits the
means of compliance. The advances in
engines monitoring systems and
electronics offer technology that should
be utilized by the aviation community.
By broadening this airworthiness
standard, fuel flow indicators or new
fuel system monitors may provide better
information to the pilot.
For the reasons discussed in the
preamble, and based on the findings in
the Regulatory Flexibility Determination
and the International Trade Impact
Analysis, the FAA has determined that
this regulation is not significant under
Executive Order 12866. In addition, the
FAA certifies that this regulation will
not have a significant economic impact,
positive or negative, on a substantial
number of small entities under the
criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.
The regulation is not considered
significant under DOT Regulatory
Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034;
February 26, 1979). A regulatory
evaluation of the regulation, including a
Regulatory Flexibility Determination
and Trade Impact Analysis, has been
/ Rules and Regulations
placed in the docket. A copy may be
obtained by contacting the person
identified under FOR FURTHER
INFORMATION CONTACT.
List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 23
Aircraft, Aviation safety, Signs and
symbols.
The Amendment
In consideration of the foregoing, the
Federal Aviation Administration
amends 14 CFR part 23 as follows:
PART 23—AIRWORTHINESS
STANDARDS; NORMAL, UTILITY,
ACROBATIC, AND COMMUTER
CATEGORY AIRPLANES
1. The authority citation for part 23
continues to read as follows:
Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40113, 44701–
44702, 44704.
2. Section 23.1305 is amended by
revising paragraph (b)(4) to read as
follows:
§ 23.1305 Powerplant instruments.
* * * * *
(b) * * *
(4) For each pump-fed engine, a
means:
(i) That continuously indicates, to the
pilot, the fuel pressure or fuel flow; or
(ii) That continuously monitors the
fuel system and warns the pilot of any
fuel flow trend that could lead to engine
failure.
* * * * *
Issued in Washington, D.C. on March 21,
1996.
David R. Hinson,
Administrator.
[FR Doc. 96–7429 Filed 3–26–96; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4910–13–M
