CFR NPRM: Part 23

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: January 31, 1973 (Volume 38, Number 20)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 2985]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 10162

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT: Crashworthiness For Small Airplanes

 
        
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: 14 CFR Parts 23, 91

 The Federal Aviation Administration is considering amending Part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations to require on all small civil airplanes for which applications for type certificates under Part 23 are filed after the effective date of the proposed amendment, the installation of shoulder harnesses and that cabin and flight crew compartment interiors be designed to protect occupants from injury caused by contact with interior objects. In addition, the FAA is considering amending Part 91 to require the installation of shoulder harnesses on all small civil airplanes manufactured after 1 year from the effective date of the proposed amendment, and on small civil airplanes manufactured prior to that date if they have structural provisions for the attachment of shoulder harnesses, and to require occupants of seats equipped with shoulder harnesses to use the shoulder harnesses during takeoff and landing.

 
        
DATES: Comments on this notice must be received on or before July 18, 1973.

 
        
ADDRESSES: 

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

 Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications should identify the docket number and be submitted in duplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the General Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket, AGC-24, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, D.C. 20591. All communications received on or before April 30, 1973, will be considered by the Administrator before taking action upon the proposed rule. The proposals contained in this notice may be changed in the light of comments received. All comments will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the rules docket, for examination by interested persons.

 Section 23.785 (g) of the Federal Aviation Regulations, as amended August 1,1969, Amendment 23-7, requires small civil airplanes for which applications for type certificates under Part 23 are filed after September 14, 1969, to provide each occupant with protection from head injury either (1) by a safety belt and shoulder harness that will prevent the head from contacting any injurious object, or; (2) by a safety belt plus an energy absorbing rest that will support the arms, shoulders, head and spine, or; (3) by a safety belt plus the elimination of any injurious object within striking radius of the head.

 Subsequent to the adoption of Amendment 23-7 the FAA has continued its review of the very complex area of occupant restraint and crashworthiness of small airplanes. The FAA has also received suggestions concerning areas in which the protection of occupants from injury in a crash or emergency landing might be improved, including recommendations by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). In addition, Mr. Ralph Nader filed a petition with the FAA requesting the institution of rulemaking to improve the crashworthiness of small aircraft. In disposing of that petition the FAA advised that it was in the process of developing proposals concerning shoulder harness and occupant restraints and the improvement of the design of cabin interiors which would be included in the notice of proposed rule making. This notice takes into account the recommendations made by the NTSB and by Mr. Nader concerning requirements for shoulder harnesses and cabin interior design.

 After evaluating the data and recommendations received and upon consideration of the type certification requirements for small airplanes, the FAA believes that additional crash protection is needed for occupants of small airplanes type certificated under Part 23, and proposed herein to amend Sec. 23.785(g) to require that each occupant of those airplanes be protected from head injury when he experiences the inertia forces prescribed in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2) in a forward facing seat (0° to 18° angle with the vertical plane containing the airplane centerline) or in a sideward facing seat (more than 18°) by a safety belt and shoulder harness. In addition, a sideward facing seat that is angled toward the rear of the airplane would be required to have an energy absorbing rest that would support the arms, shoulders, head, and spine. A rearward facing seat (0° to 18°) would be required to have a safety belt and an energy absorbing rest, but not a shoulder harness since the seat would prevent an occupant from pitching forward in the event of a crash. Furthermore, the FAA believes that, in order to provide the intended crash impact protection for flight crewmembers, each flight crewmember's shoulder harness should be fastened at all times. Therefore, it is proposed to add a new Sec. 23.785 (h) that would require that shoulder harness installations at flight crewmember stations permit a crewmember, when seated at his station, with his safety belt and shoulder harness fastened, to perform all functions necessary for flight operations.

 In addition, the FAA believes that there should be provisions to prevent shoulder harnesses and safety belts, when not in use, from interfering with the operation of the airplane or with rapid egress under emergency conditions. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new Sec. 23.785 (i) and would require that a means be provided to secure safety belts and shoulder harnesses when not in use.

 While the proposed shoulder harness requirements should reduce the probability of occupant injury in small airplanes, the FAA believes that further protection should be provided in the area surrounding each seat within striking distance of the occupant's head, torso, and flailing arms and legs. Therefore, it is proposed to add a new Sec. 23.785 (j) that would require that this area (including interior walls, the instrument panel, control wheels, pedals, and seats) be free of sharp edges, protuberances, and hard areas.

 Section 23.1307 is being amended editorially to delete the requirement for a safety belt for each occupant as redundant because Sec. 23.785 presently requires a safety belt for each occupant.

 The foregoing proposed amendments would be applicable only to small civil airplanes for which applications for type certification under Part 23 are filed after the effective date of the amendments. However, the FAA believes that, to the extend feasible and reasonable, small civil airplanes already in service should also be equipped with shoulder harnesses. Many small civil airplanes presently in service have structural provisions (tie-down points) for the attachment of shoulder harnesses and the installation of shoulder harnesses in these airplanes should not present any significant problem. However, there are a number of small civil airplanes now in service that cannot readily be fitted with shoulder harnesses since the necessary attachment points were not included in the design of the airplane.

 The FAA believes, further, that it would be feasible and not unreasonably burdensome, for small civil airplane manufacturers to provide shoulder harness attachment points on airplanes being constructed under existing type certificates so that airplanes manufactured after the effective date of this amendment could be equipped with shoulder harnesses. The date of manufacture of an airplane, for purposes of the proposed rules, would be the date the inspection acceptance records reflect that the airplane is complete and meets the FAA approved type design data. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend Secs. 91.33 and 91.39 to prohibit, after 1 year after the effective date of this proposed amendment, the operation of such small civil airplanes with standard category and restricted category U.S. airworthiness certificates unless they have an approved shoulder harness installed (for each occupant except an occupant of a rearward facing seat specified in Sec. 23.785 (g)(2) that is designed to protect the occupant from injury when the occupant experiences the ultimate inertia forces specified in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2). This regulation would not apply to airplanes that were manufactured prior to 1 year after the effective date of any final rule based on this proposed amendment and that do not have structural provisions for the attachment of shoulder harnesses. The proposal would require that a placard be installed on those airplanes stating that shoulder harnesses are not required in order to assure that this information is available to the pilots of these airplanes. It is also proposed to amend Secs. 91.7 and 91.14 to require each occupant of a seat equipped with a shoulder harness to fasten his shoulder harness during takeoff and landing, and in the case of a flight crewmember, at all times while he is at his station.

 The FAA has also received suggestions from Mr. Nader and the NTSB concerning other areas in which the protection of occupants from injury in a crash or emergency landing might be improved. In this connection it was suggested that the regulations be amended to require higher impact "g" force levels than are now prescribed, to require that the cockpit or cabin structure remain intact under those impact forces, to require the dynamic testing of seats, and to require further means to reduce potential ignition sources associated with accidents. Although the FAA's basic research and development programs and the data and recommendations submitted by those interested persons indicate possible future courses of action with regard to upgrading the crashworthiness of small airplanes in those areas, the information presently available is not sufficient to support rule-making action. The FAA is continuing its investigations in those areas and appropriate rule-making action will be initiated when sufficient data is available to provide a basis for rulemaking.

 

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: 

The Proposed Amendment: In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed to amend Parts 23 and 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows:

1. Section 23.785 would be amended by amending the title and paragraphs (b) and (g) and by adding new paragraphs (h), (i), and (j) to read as follows:

Sec. 23.785 Seats, berths, safety belts, and harnesses.

* * * * * 

(b) Each seat, berth, safety belt, and harness must be approved.

* * * * *

(g) Each occupant must be protected from head injury when he experiences the inertia forces prescribed in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2) in -

(1) A forward facing seat (0° to 18° angle with the vertical plane containing the airplane, centerline) by a safety belt and shoulder harness that is designed to prevent the head from contacting any injurious object.

(2) A rearward facing seat (0° to 18° angle with the vertical plane containing the airplane centerline) by a safety belt and an energy absorbing rest that is designed to support the arms, shoulders, head, and spine.

(3) A sideward facing seat (more than and 18° angle with the vertical plane containing the airplane centerline) by a safety belt and shoulder harness that will prevent the head from contacting any injurious object. In addition, sideward facing seats that are angled toward the rear of the airplane must have an energy absorbing rest that is designed to support the arms, shoulders, head, and spine.

(h) The shoulder harness installation at each flight crewmember station must permit the crewmember, when seated and with his safety belt and shoulder harness fastened, to perform all functions necessary for flight operations.

(i) There must be a means to secure each safety belt and shoulder harness, when not in use, so as to prevent interference with the operation of the airplane and with rapid egress in an emergency

(j) The cabin area surrounding each seat, including the structure, interior walls, instrument panel, control wheel, pedals, and seats, within striking distance of the occupant's head, torso, arms, and legs (with the safety belt fastened), must be free of potentially injurious objects, sharp edges, protuberances, and hard surfaces. If energy absorbing design or devices are used to meet this requirement, they must protect the occupant from injury when the occupant experiences the ultimate inertia forces prescribed in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2).

2. Section 23.1307 would be amended by deleting present paragraph (a) and redesignating present paragraph (b) as follows:

Sec. 23.1307 Miscellaneous equipment.

The following equipment is required miscellaneous equipment:

(a) A master switch arrangement.

(b) An adequate source of electrical energy.

(c) Electrical protective devices.

3. Section 91.7 would be amended by amending paragraph (b) and adding a new paragraph (c) to read as follows:

Sec. 91.7 Flight crewmembers at stations.

* * * * *

(b) Keep his safety belt fastened while at his station.

(c) After 1 year after the effective date of this amendment) in a U.S. registered small civil airplane, if the seat at his station is equipped with a shoulder harness, keep the shoulder harness fastened while at his station.

4. Section 91.14 would be amended by amending the title and by amending paragraphs (a) and (b) to read as follows:

Sec. 91.14 Fastening of safety belts and shoulder harnesses.

(a) Unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator -

(1) No pilot may take off or land a U.S. registered aircraft (except an airship) unless the pilot in command of that aircraft ensures that -

(i) Each person on board that aircraft has been instructed in the proper use of occupant restraint provisions.

(ii) Each person on board that aircraft has been notified to fasten his safety belt.

(iii) Each person on board that aircraft occupying a seat equipped with a shoulder harness has been notified to fasten his shoulder harness.

(iv) At each unoccupied seat, the safety belt and shoulder harness, if installed, are secured so as not to interfere with the operation of the aircraft and with rapid egress of occupants in an emergency.

(2) During the takeoff and landing of U.S. registered civil aircraft (except airships), each person on board that aircraft must occupy a seat or berth with a safety belt properly secured about him. However, a person who has not reached his second birthday may be held by an adult who is occupying a seat or berth, and a person on board for the purpose of engaging in sport parachuting may use the floor of the aircraft as a seat.

(3) During the takeoff and landing of a U.S. registered civil aircraft (except an airship), each person on board that aircraft occupying a seat equipped with a shoulder harness must properly secure the shoulder harness about him.

(b) This section does not apply to operations conducted under Parts 121, 123, or 127 of this chapter. Paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section do not apply to persons subject to Sec. 91.7.

5. Section 91.33 would be amended by adding a new paragraph (b) (13) to read as follows:

Sec. 91.33 Powered civil aircraft with standard category U.S. airworthiness certificates; instrument and equipment requirements.

* * * * *

(b) * * *

(13) For small civil airplanes, except those manufactured prior to (1 year after the effective date of this amendment) that do not have structural provisions for the attachment of shoulder harnesses but have a placard installed that states "shoulder harnesses not required", after (1 year after the effective date of this amendment), approved shoulder harnesses that are designed to protect each occupant (except occupants of rearward facing seats described in Sec. 23.785 (g)(2)) from head injury when the occupant experiences the ultimate inertia forces specified in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2). For purposes of this section, the date of manufacture of an airplane is the date the inspection acceptance records reflect that the airplane is complete and meets the FAA approved type design data. The shoulder harness installation at each flight crewmember station must permit the crewmember, when seated and with his safety belt and shoulder harness fastened, to perform all functions necessary for flight operations.

6. Section 91.39 would be amended by adding a new paragraph (f) to read as follows:

Sec. 91.39 Restricted category civil aircraft; operating limitations.

* * * * *

(f) Except as to airplanes manufactured prior to (1 year after the effective date of this amendment) that do not have structural provision for the attachment of shoulder harnesses but have a placard installed that states "shoulder harnesses not required", after (1 year after the effective date of this amendment), no person may operate a small restricted category civil airplane unless approved shoulder harnesses are installed that are designed to protect each occupant (except occupants of rearward facing seats described in Sec. 23.785 (g) (2)), from head injury when the occupant experiences the ultimate inertia forces specified in Sec. 23.561 (b)(2). For purposes of this section, the date of manufacture of an airplane is the date the inspection acceptance records reflect that the airplane is complete and meets the FAA approved type design data. The shoulder harness installation at each flight crewmember station must permit the crewmember, when seated and with his safety belt and shoulder harness fastened, to perform all functions necessary for flight operations.

(Secs. 313(a), 601 and 603, Federal Aviation Act of 1958, 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1421, and 1423; sec. 6(c), Department of Transportation Act, 49 U.S.C. 1655 (c))

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Washington, DC, on January 18, 1973.

C. R Melugin, Jr.,

Acting Director, Flight Standards Service,

[FR Doc. 73-1770 Filed 1-30-73; 8:45 am]

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.