CFR NPRM: Part 23

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: December 16, 1982 (Volume 47, Number 242)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 56456]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 21571

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT: Equipment Standards for Oxygen Dispensing Units

 
        
ACTION: Notice of proposed rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: This notice proposes to revise the equipment standards for oxygen dispensing units. This proposal results from a petition for rulemaking submitted by the White Diamond Corporation to permit the use of nasal cannulas by pilots and passengers instead of an oxygen dispensing unit (mask) covering the nose and mouth of the user. The nasal cannula is a device frequently used in a hospital environment to supply supplemental oxygen to patients by fitting the device into the nose. This proposal provides relief from a specific equipment standard when oxygen dispensing units are installed in small airplanes.

 
        
DATES: Comments must be received on or before February 16, 1983.

 
        
ADDRESSES: Comments on the proposal may be mailed in duplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel, ATTN: Rules Docket (AGC-204), Docket No. 21571, 800 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20591, or delivered in duplicate to: Room 916, 800 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20591. Comments delivered must be marked: Docket No. 21571. Comments may be inspected at Room 916 between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays except Federal holidays.

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: J. Robert Ball, Regulations and Policy Office (ACE-110), Aircraft Certification Division, Central Region, Federal Aviation Administration, 601 E. 12th Street, Kansas City, MO 64106; Telephone (816) 374-5688.

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Comments Invited

 Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Comments relating to the environmental, energy, or economic impact that might result from the adoption of the proposal in this notice are invited. All initial comments received on or before the closing date for those comments will be considered by the Administrator before taking action on the proposed rule. The proposal contained in this notice may be changed or withdrawn in the light of comments received. All comments received will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizing each substantive contact with FAA personnel concerned with this rulemaking will be filed in the docket. Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must submit with those comments a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: "Comments to Docket No. 21571." The postcard will be date/time stamped and returned to the commenter.

Availability of NPRM

 Any person may obtain a copy of this notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of Public Affairs, ATTN: Public Information Center, APA-430, 800 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20591, or by calling (202) 420-8959. Requests must identify the notice number of the NPRM. Persons interested in being placed on a mailing list for future NPRMs should also request a copy of Advisory Circular No. 11-2 which describes the application procedures.

Background

 Airworthiness standards for oxygen dispensing units in small airplanes have been in effect since June 17, 1970, and are applicable only if certification with supplementary oxygen equipment is desired. This proposal concerns an additional method, with limitations, of complying with the minimum safety requirements for small airplanes when oxygen dispensing units are installed.

 The FAA, to obtain public awareness and early participation in this rulemaking action, published the White Diamond Corporation's recommended change to Sec. 23.1447 of the Federal Aviation Regulations in the Federal Register (46 FR 30352) on June 6, 1961. Comments to the proposed change were requested with a closing date for these comments of August 10, 1961.

 Numerous comments were received in response to the Federal Register publication and all comments received supported the proposal. Most comments cited the convenience and comfort of the nasal cannula and ease of communications when compared to a conventional oxygen mask covering both the nose and mouth. However, none of the comments spoke specifically to the physiological aspects nor presented physiological data on the effectiveness of a nasal cannula to supply supplemental oxygen.

 The primary purpose of supplying supplemental oxygen is to prevent hypoxia and hypoxia's consequences. When a blood oxygen saturation level of 90 percent or less is present, a state of hypoxia, a term meaning deficiency of oxygen in the body, develops. Hypoxia has an insidious beginning. Most pilots who are trained to understand and recognize the subjective effects of hypoxia will notice that fatigue, sleepiness, or headaches develop in the early stages. As the symptoms progress, breathlessness and an abnormal feeling of well-being appear plus adverse effects on vision, mental processes, and body motor functions. Unfortunately, occasionally there are no subjective indications of hypoxia up to the time of unconsciousness. All persons begin to deteriorate in alertness and mental efficiency when exposed to high altitudes and when one ascends above 14,000 feet, a distinct impairment of mental functions occurs without supplemental oxygen.

 In support of their petition, the White Diamond Corporation submitted a copy of an information report prepared by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP). This report cited the results of tests performed with test subjects using a nasal cannula at various pressure altitudes from ground level to 25,000 feet. These tests were conducted using only six test subjects and failed to provide a correlation between the test subjects and the general aviation population that might use a nasal cannula to provide adequate supplemental oxygen.

 After an analysis of the results of the tests performed by the AFIP, and other physiological information obtained, the FAA has concluded that a nasal cannula is an effective oxygen dispensing device with certain limitations. The FAA is not persuaded that a nasal cannula will provide for effective utilization of the oxygen being supplied to persons at the maximum altitudes requested in the petition; i.e., 20,000 feet for pilots and 32,000 feet for passengers. The analysis of the AFIP test data and other information obtained indicates that a limitation of 18,000 feet should be imposed for approved use of nasal cannulas in lieu of the currently required unit covering both the nose and mouth in maintain a minimum level of safety.

 There are two precautions which should be taken when the nasal cannula is installed. First, because the nasal cannual does not obstruct or cover the mouth, smoking is possible and each cannual or its connected tubing should have permanently affixed, a clearly visible warning against smoking while the nasal cannula is in use; and secondly, each nasal cannula should clearly illustrate to the user the correct method of wearing and securing it.

Discussion of the Proposed Amendment

 The FAA concluded that the petitioner's proposal has merit. The proposed amendment permitting the use of nasal cannulas with limitations would serve as an optional method of complying with the minimum safety requirements for small airplanes when oxygen dispensing units are installed. The amendment, if adopted, would reduce a burden to use a specific type of oxygen dispensing unit when an alternate unit could be used and maintain the minimum level of safety to 18,000 feet with limitations and correct donning instruction. The proposed amendment is permissive; therefore, no economic burden is imposed on the industry, the government, or the private sector by this action. However, some of the comments received indicated that a fuel savings may be realized by flying at a higher altitude with a nasal cannula. It was stated that the inconvenience of having to remove the oxygen dispensing unit in order to communicate precluded the commenters from using the higher altitudes at the present time.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 23

 Aircraft, Aviation safety, Safety, Air transportation

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: The Proposed Amendment

 Accordingly, the Federal Aviation Administration proposes to amend Part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR Part 23) as follows:

PART 23--AIRWORTHINESS STANDARDS: NORMAL, UTILITY, AND ACROBATIC CATEGORY AIRPLANES

 1. By amending Sec. 23.1447 to remove paragraph (a)(2) and to redesignate paragraph (a)(3) and (a)(4) as paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3), respectively; by redesignating paragraphs (b), (c), and (d) as paragraphs (d), (e), and (f), respectively; and by adding new paragraphs (b) and (c) to read as follows:

Sec. 23.1447 Equipment standards for oxygen dispensing units.

 * * * * *

 (a) * * *

 (b) If certification for operation up to and including 18,000 feet (MSL) is requested, each oxygen dispensing unit must:

 (1) Cover the nose and mouth of the user; or

 (2) Be a nasal cannula. In addition, each nasal cannula or its connecting tubing must have permanently affixed--

 (i) A visible warning against smoking while in use; and

 (ii) An illustration of the correct method of donning.

 (c) If certification for operation above 18,000 feet (MSL) is requested, each oxygen dispensing unit must cover the nose and mouth of the user.

 * * * * *

 (Secs. 313(a) and 601 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended (14 U.S.C. 1354(a) and 1421). Section 6(c) of the Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1655(c)), and Sec. 11.45 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR 11.45))

 

 Note.--This proposal would provide more flexibility for approval of oxygen dispensing units when type certification with supplemental oxygen equipment is requested by permitting optional use of an economical alternative. Accordingly, the FAA has determined that: (1) The proposal does not involve a major proposal under Executive Order 12291; (2) the proposal is not significant under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979); and (3) it is certified under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act that the proposed amendment will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities. A regulatory evaluation has been prepared and has been placed in the public docket.

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Kansas City, MO, on September 30, 1982.

Murray E. Smith, 

Director, Central Region.

[FR Doc 83-33942 Filed 12-15-82; 8:45 am]

BILLING CODE 4910-13-M

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.