CFR NPRM: Part 23

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: July 19, 1967 (Volume 32, Number 138)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 10602]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 8281

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT: Installation and Operating Requirements for Oxygen Equipment and Supply

 
        
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: 14 CFR Parts 23 and 91

 The Federal Aviation Administration is considering amending Parts 23 and 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations to include requirements pertaining to the installation and use of oxygen equipment. This amendment would provide appropriate oxygen system standards for airplanes certificated under Part 23 and at the same time set forth regulations for the use of oxygen in all aircraft governed by the general operating and flight rules of Part 91.

 
        
DATES: Comments on this notice must be received on or before October 16, 1967.

 
        
ADDRESSES: Comments on this notice may be mailed in duplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the General Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, D.C. 20590.

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications should identify the docket number and be submitted in duplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the General Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, D.C. 20590. All communications received on or before October 16, 1967, will be considered by the Administrator before taking action upon the proposed rule. The proposals contained in this notice may be changed in the light of comments received. All comments will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons.

 In a study concerning the physiological requirements for oxygen entitled "Oxygen in General Aviation" dated December 1964, the Office of Aviation Medicine of the FAA reported that, while individual oxygen requirements may be influenced by factors such as fatigue, age, use of drugs and tobacco, night, etc., nevertheless supplemental oxygen, dependent on altitude, is a physiological necessity for all humans. For this reason and because of the increasing number of small airplanes having high altitude capability, there appears to be a need for airplane airworthiness standards and for general operating rules relating to oxygen system requirements.

 In the past, type certification of small airplanes with oxygen equipment installed has been handled on a case-by-case basis either by application of special conditions or under the general operating limitations of Sec. 23.1501. This amendment proposes uniform airworthiness standards for oxygen equipment and supply. It also proposes performance standards relating to oxygen mass flow and equipment standards for oxygen dispensing units.

 In connection with the standards for minimum mass flow of supplemental oxygen, the proposed Sec. 23.1443 contains requirements for continuous flow but not for demand flow oxygen equipment. The requirements of the more commonly used continuous flow systems are thus covered, while the mass flow of demand systems, where such systems are used, would be approved on a case-by-case basis as before.

 Parts 121 and 135 of the Federal Aviation Regulations currently prescribed oxygen requirements for pilots and passengers. For consistency in the interest of safety, all other aircraft operating in the same airspace and environmental conditions should be under comparable standards. The FAA, therefore, considers it appropriate to propose general operating and flight rules governing the use of supplemental oxygen in pressurized and unpressurized cabin aircraft.

 FAA studies have indicated that for any person in a pressurized cabin subjected to decompression at the higher altitudes, the short time available to don an oxygen mask before losing consciousness may be critical. In such case, the smaller the cabin volume, the more aggravated the situation becomes. As an added operational consideration, the FAA, therefore, believes it necessary for safety, at flight altitudes above 35,000 feet, that at least one pilot at the controls be required to wear an oxygen mask. The corresponding altitude for Part 121 operations had originally been established at 35,000 feet. However, it was subsequently raised, in steps, to 41,000 feet, on the basis of the extensive operating experience with the large transport-category airplanes. This satisfactory operating experience is attributable, in part, to the stringent Part 121 crew training and maintenance requirements. Such compensating conditions do not presently exist for operations conducted under Part 91 and the proposed cutoff altitude has been accordingly set at 35,000 feet.

 A new Sec. 91.32 would be added to the general operating rules of Part 91 to regulate the use of supplemental oxygen throughout the range of cabin altitudes and specify the oxygen supply to be carried, including the oxygen necessary for emergency descent. Supplemental oxygen refers to any oxygen, by whatever means supplied, that is furnished in addition to the oxygen normally present in the air.

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed to amend the Parts 23 and 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows:

 1. By amending Part 23 by adding the following new sections to Subpart F:

Sec. 23.1441 Oxygen equipment and supply.

 (a) If certification with supplemental oxygen equipment is requested, the equipment must meet the requirements of this section and Secs. 23.1443 through 23.1449.

 (b) The oxygen system must be free from hazards in itself, in its method of operation, and in its effect upon other components.

 (c) There must be a means to allow the crew to readily determine, during flight, the quantity of oxygen available in each source of supply.

 (d) Demand flow oxygen equipment and oxygen equipment for use above 40,000 feet must be approved.

Sec. 23.1443 Minimum mass flow of supplemental oxygen.

 If continuous flow oxygen equipment is installed for use by occupants of the airplane, the mass flow of supplemental oxygen required for each user must be at a rate not less than that shown in the following figure:

Sec. 23.1447 Equipment standards for oxygen dispensing units.

 If oxygen dispensing units are installed, the following apply:

 (a) There must be an individual dispensing unit for each occupant for whom supplemental oxygen is to be supplied. Each dispensing unit must:

 (1) Provide for effective utilization of the oxygen being delivered to the unit.

 (2) Cover the nose and mouth of the user.

 (3) Be capable of being readily placed into position on the face of the user.

 (4) Be equipped with a suitable means to retain the unit in position on the face.

 (b) If the airplane is designed to operate at flight altitudes up to and including 25,000 feet, an oxygen supply terminal and unit of oxygen dispensing equipment must be within reach of each member of the required minimum flight crew to provide for the immediate use of oxygen by that crewmember.

 (c) If the airplane is designed to operate at flight altitudes above 25,000 feet, an oxygen dispensing unit connected to an oxygen supply terminal must be immediately available to each occupant, wherever seated.

Sec. 23.1449 Means for determining use of oxygen.

 There must be a means to allow the crew to determine whether oxygen is being delivered to the dispensing equipment.

 2. By amending Part 91 by adding the following new section:

Sec. 91.32 Supplemental oxygen.

 (a) General. No person may operate a civil aircraft--

 (1) At cabin pressure altitudes above 12,000 feet (MSL) up to and including 14,000 feet (MSL) for that part of the flight at those altitudes that is of more than 30 minutes duration, unless the required minimum flight crew is provided with, and uses, supplemental oxygen;

 (2) At cabin pressure altitudes above 14,000 feet (MSL), unless the required minimum flight crew is provided with, and uses, supplemental oxygen during the entire flight time at those altitudes; and

 (3) At cabin pressure altitudes above 15,000 feet (MSL), unless each occupant of the aircraft is provided with, and uses, supplemental oxygen.

 (b) Pressurized cabin aircraft. No person may operate a civil aircraft with a pressurized cabin--

 (1) At flight altitudes above 25,000 feet (MSL), unless at least a 10-minute supply of supplemental oxygen, in addition to any oxygen required to satisfy paragraph (a) of this section, is available for each occupant of the aircraft for use in the event that a descent is necessitated by loss of cabin pressurization; and

 (2) At flight altitudes above 35,000 feet (MSL), unless at least one pilot at the controls is wearing, secured and sealed, and oxygen mask supplying oxygen.

 (Sec. 313(a), 601, 603, Federal Aviation Act of 1958; 49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1421, and 1423)

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Washington, DC, on July 11, 1967.

R. S. Sliff,

Acting Director, Flight Standards Service.

[FR Doc. 67-8229 Filed 7-18-67; 8:45 am]

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.