CFR NPRM: Part 23|Part 25

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: March 20, 1969 (Volume 34, Number 54)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 5440]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 9485

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23|Part 25

 
        
SUBJECT: Maintenance Requirements

 
        
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: 14 CFR Parts 1, 23, 25, 43, and 91

 The Federal Aviation Administration is considering amending the Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) to (1) provide a definition of the term "rebuild" and establish performance standards for such work and, (2) to provide for a maintenance manual for airplanes type certificated under Parts 23 and 25 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.

 
        
DATES: Comments on this notice must be received on or before June 20, 1969

 
        
ADDRESSES: 

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications should identify the docket or notice number and be submitted in duplicate to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the General Counsel, Attention: Rules Docket, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, D.C. 20590. All communications received on or before June 20, 1969, will be considered by the Administrator before taking action on the proposed rule. The proposal contained in this notice may be changed in light of comments received. All comments submitted will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons.

 The current regulations allow a manufacturer to rebuild any aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or appliance manufactured by him under a type or production certificate and to rebuild any appliance or part of aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or appliance manufactured by him under a Technical Standard Order Authorization, an FAA Parts Manufacture Approval, or Product and Process Specification. While the regulations have long provided for the rebuilding of products by the manufacturers, the term has been defined in the FARs only with respect to the rebuilding of aircraft engines. With the number of manufacturers engaged in the rebuilding of their products increasing, the FAA considers it appropriate in the interest of uniformity to define the term, generally for all products. It is also considered appropriate to establish performance standards specifically for such work. In this connection, the proposal uses the criteria currently applied to rebuild engines.

 At the present time, the regulations governing the type certification of rotorcraft require that each rotorcraft have a maintenance manual containing the information that the type certificate applicant considers essential for the proper maintenance of the rotorcraft. In addition, the regulations require that each engine and propeller manufacturer prepare and make available an approved manual containing instructions for installing, operating, servicing and maintaining the engine or propeller. The FAA has recently recognized this necessity with respect to airplanes capable of carrying more than 10 persons and used in Air Taxi operations under Part 135. However, there are no such requirements for other airplanes. Because of the increasing complexity of even the smaller airplanes not to mention the very large airplanes now in the process of certification, the continued airworthiness of such airplanes requires that a maintenance manual be made available to the owners and operators of these airplanes.

 These amendments are proposed under the authority of sections 313(a), 601, and 603 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 U.S.C. 1354(a), 1421, and 1423), and of section 6(c) of the Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 1655(c)).

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: The Proposed Amendment: In consideration of the foregoing, it is proposed to amend Parts 1, 23, 25, 43, and 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as follows:

1. By amending Sec. 1.1 of Part 1 by adding a new definition to read as follows:

Sec. 1.1 General definitions.

* * * * *

"Rebuild" means the disassembly, rework, reassembly, and testing of an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof, to the same design data (including the same specifications, tolerances, and limits) as a new aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof.

* * * * *

2. By amending Sec. 43.13 by adding a new paragraph to read as follows:

Sec. 43.13 Performance rules (general).

* * * * *

Each manufacturer rebuilding an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof shall do that work in such a manner and use materials of such quality that the aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof is equal to its original condition. Either new or used parts may be used. However, all parts used must conform to the production drawing tolerances and limits for new parts or be of an approved oversize or undersize dimension for a new aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof.

Sec. 91.175 [Deleted]

3. By deleting Sec. 91.175.

4. By amending Sec. 91.173 by adding a paragraph (d) to read as follows:

Sec. 91.173 Maintenance records.

* * * * *

(d) Each registered owner or operator may use a new maintenance record without previous operating history for an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, or part thereof rebuilt by the manufacturer in accordance with the performance rules prescribed in Part 43 of this chapter.

5. By amending Parts 23 and 25 by adding new Secs. 23.1529 and 25.1529, respectively, to read as follows:

Sec. 23-25.1529 Maintenance manual.

A maintenance manual containing the information that the applicant considers essential for proper maintenance must be made available to the owner at the time of delivery of the airplane. The manual must include at least the following:

(a) Description of systems such as electrical, hydraulic, fuel controls, etc.

(b) Lubrication instructions setting forth the frequency and the lubricants and fluids which are to be used in the various systems.

(c) Pressures and electrical loads applicable to the various systems.

(d) Tolerances and adjustments necessary for proper functioning of the airplane.

(e) Methods of leveling, raising, and towing.

(f) Methods of balancing control surfaces.

(g) Identification of primary and secondary structures.

(h) Frequency and extend of inspections necessary to the proper operation of the airplane.

(i) Special repair methods applicable to the airplane.

(j) Special inspection techniques that require X-ray, ultrasonic, or magnetic particle inspection.

(k) List of special tools.

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Washington, DC, on March 14, 1969.

R.S. Sliff,

Acting Director, Fight Standards Service.

[FR Doc. 69-3354 Filed 3-19-69; 8:50 am]

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.