CFR NPRM: Part 23

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: December 28, 1994 (Volume 59, Number 248)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 67114] 

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 28011

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT: Powerplant Instruments; Fuel Pressure Indication

 
        
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: This document proposes to amend the certification requirement for fuel pressure indicators on pump fed engines of small airplanes to permit regulatory alternatives to warn pilots of fuel system problems. A fuel pressure indicator is not the only means available to the pilot of indicating a fuel system problem. The proposed change would allow airplanes to be certificated with means that indicate fuel flow, or that monitor the fuel system and warn the pilot of a trend that could lead to engine failure. New technology that would be incorporated as means of compliance with the revised rule could improve engine operation and reduce airplane operating costs.

 
        
DATES: Comments must be received on or before February 27, 1995.

 
        
ADDRESSES: Comments on this document should be mailed in triplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel, Attention: Rules docket (AGC-10), Docket No. 28011, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591. Comments delivered must be marked Docket No. 28011. Comments may be inspected in room 915G weekdays between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m., except on Federal holidays.

 In addition, the FAA is maintaining an information docket of comments in the Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel, ACE-7, Federal Aviation Administration, Central Region, 601 East 12th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64106. Comments in the information docket may be inspected in the Office of the Assistant Chief Counsel weekdays, except Federal holidays, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4 p.m.

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: J. Lowell Foster, Standards Office, Small Airplane Directorate, Aircraft Certification Service, Federal Aviation Administration, 601 East 12th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64106; telephone (816) 426-5688.

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Comments Invited

 Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Comments relating to the environmental, energy, or economic impact that might result from adopting the proposals in this notice are also invited. Substantive comments should be accompanied by cost estimates. Comments should identify the regulatory docket or notice number and should be submitted in triplicate to the Rules Docket address specified above. All comments received on or before the closing date for comments specified will be considered by the Administrator before taking action on this proposed rulemaking. The proposals contained in this notice may be changed in light of comments received. All comments received will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizing each substantive public contact with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel concerned with this rulemaking will be filed in the docket. Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of their comments submitted in response to this notice must include a preaddressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made:

 "Comments to Docket No. 28011." The postcard will be date stamped and mailed to the commenter.

Availability to NPRM

 Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center, APA-200, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling (202) 267-3484. Communications must identify the notice number of this NPRM.

 Persons interested in being placed on the mailing list for future NPRMs should request, from the above office, a copy of Advisory Circular No. 11-2A, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describes the application procedure.

Background

Statement of the Problem

 The FAA proposed to amend Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Sec. 23.1305 (b)(4), which currently requires a fuel pressure indicator for each pump fed engine. The pressure indicator gives continuous fuel pressure readings to the pilot. This information provides an advance warning of engine failure only when a pilot notices that the pressure reading has deviated from the norm, and the pilot can diagnose what those deviations mean in terms of potential engine failure. This proposal would allow the options of a fuel pressure indicator, a fuel flow indicator, or a means that continuously monitors the fuel system and warns the pilot of any engine trend that could cause engine failure. A fuel flow indicator would give continuous fuel flow readings to the pilot; fuel flow information can be more meaningful to the pilot during critical phases of flight. The proposed continuous fuel system monitoring would alert the pilot to any trend that could lead to engine failure.

History

 The first requirement for a fuel pressure indicator was found in Civil Air Regulation (CAR) 4b, the predecessor to part 25 of Title 14 for transport airplanes. That requirement applied to all reciprocating engine airplanes. CAR 3, applicable to small airplanes, followed CAR 4b and was the predecessor to part 23 of Title 14. Amendment 1 to CAR 3, adopted December 15, 1946, required fuel pressure indicators on airplanes with pump-fed engines. Many small airplanes of that era used gravity-fed fuel systems, which made a fuel pressure indication unnecessary. Also, a fuel pressure indication was not required if the fuel pump was certificated as part of the engine. Since early fuel pumps were less reliable, the intent of the CAR requirements was to provide the pilot with advance warning of a fuel pump failure. This allowed the pilot to diagnose the problem and prevent engine failure or determine the cause after the engine quit.

 Engines of the CAR 3 era were designed with carburetors. Carburetors were replaced by fuel injection. At the same time, radial engines were being replaced with horizontally opposed engines, the configurations currently used in the majority of light airplanes.

 As horizontally opposed engines gained popularity and grew in displacement, two different types of fuel injection systems emerged. One consisted of a fuel injector or fuel metering unit that relied on a separate constant pressure pump to supply fuel to the injector. Since the metering (regulating) was done at the injector, the fuel pressure required was not critical as long as the pump could provide a specific range of pressures. For example, if the injector has a 20 psi requirement, 23-30 psi pump pressure was acceptable because the fuel pressure on the outlet side of the injector was 20 psi. But, if the pressure out of the pump fell below 20 psi, the injector would fail to provide adequate fuel to the engine.

 The second type of fuel injection system used a fuel pump in which pressure was proportional to engine RPM. This pump is still referred to as a speed-sensing integral fuel pump. Any change in pump pressure resulted in a change in engine operation.

 Regulatory interpretation resulted in confusion over what was acceptable for fuel pressure monitoring, including the requirements for the content of indicated information and the pressure pick-up location. Some installations utilizing the constant pressure pump were required to have a pressure indicator measuring unmetered fuel pressure at the fuel pump output. On the other hand, installations using the speed-sensing integral pump system were approved with a fuel pressure indicator measuring metered fuel pressure at the fuel distribution valve. Airplanes utilizing this system have a fuel pressure indicator labeled in fuel used per hour or fuel flow. Agency policy, briefing paper from Central Region dated October 7, 1981, accepted these fuel pressure indicators as an equivalent means of compliance if the engine was certificated was an integral speed-sensing pressure pump.

 The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) petitioned the FAA for new standards that would allow, on all pump-fed engines, a fuel flow system employing a differential pressure transducer to be accepted as an equivalent means of compliance to the current fuel pressure indicator requirements (55 FR 39299; September 26, 1990). The AOPA believes that adopting its petition would open the door for the development of new and valuable engine monitoring equipment, while potentially reducing the instrument panel clutter.

 In its petition, the AOPA states that one of the reasons for current Sec. 23.1305 (b)(4) is to give the pilots sufficient warning of any decreasing trend that cold lead to partial or total engine failure. The AOPA also states that differential pressure indicators should be accepted as a means of compliance with Sec. 23.1305 (b)(4), not that direct sensing systems should be removed from part 23.

 Following receipt of the AOPA's petition for rulemaking, the FAA requested that the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC) review the petition and recommended a course of action to the FAA. The ARAC was chartered in February 1991, under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, to provide recommendations to the FAA Administrator on FAA rulemaking activity relating to aviation safety issues.

 In January 1992, the Fuel Indicators Working Group of the ARAC on General Aviation and Business Airplane Issues began review of the AOPA's petition. Subsequently, the ARAC, recommended that the FAA revise the certification standards for fuel pressure indicators. The ARAC agreed with the AOPA's petition to allow a pressure-based fuel flow system, but felt that there may be other options in the future, and that the AOPA's language regarding a differential pressure transducer would be too restrictive. Technical advances in the automobile industry with engine systems and controls may offer improvements over the current warning systems. The ARAC did not want the proposed rule to be limited to a fuel pressure or pressure-based fuel flow gauge.

General Discussion of the Proposals

Section 23.1305

 The intent of the fuel pressure indicator requirement for pump-fed engines is to advise the pilot of a fuel pressure deficiency before total engine failure. The term "indicator" in Sec. 23.1305 (b)(4) implies that the fuel pressure be constantly displayed.

 The proposal would change the current requirements in that a fuel pressure indicator or a fuel flow indicator would be acceptable. The fuel flow indicator would constantly display information that the pilot could use to evaluate engine power, fuel mixture, and other engine performance factors. Furthermore, it is technologically possible to have a microprocessor that monitors engine operation and triggers a warning if the fuel system operation does not match the other monitored engine trends. Therefore, this proposal would also change the rule to accept a means that monitors the fuel system and warns the pilot of any trend that could lead to engine failure.

 Accordingly, this proposal would adopt a performance standard, instead of a requirement for specific equipment. In this way, the designer could show compliance with paragraph (b) of the proposed by developing any design that monitors the fuel system and warns the pilot of any trend that could lead to engine failure. The ARAC did not believe this would reduce the level of safety originally intended by the requirement. A warning light system could possibly alert the pilot sooner than if the pilot relied on an instrument panel scan to notice a trend in the fuel pressure indication.

 Microprocessing units that monitor engine operation and warn of fuel system problems have already been incorporated in transport aircraft and automobiles. Furthermore, pilots are not monitoring gauges like they use to; instead, they are increasingly relying on warnings to alert them. Late model automobiles, computers and other equipment are designed to protect the operators from mistakes by using built-in warnings. It is important to note that this NPRM does not propose to allow "idiot lights" to replace fuel pressure gauges. A light that comes on at the same time that the engine quits is useless. A warning light system that would comply with this proposal would be sophisticated enough to read transients and trends, and would give a useful warning to the pilot. The FAA expects this proposal to result in fuel systems that provide the pilot with useful engine operating information; thereby, it would offer more value to the operator.

 Today, fuel pumps are more reliable than those built in the 1940's and 50's. Consequently, airplane operators are more concerned about reducing engine operating costs than they are about the probability of a fuel pump failure.

 A fuel flow indicator offers additional value compared to a fuel pressure indicator. It enables the operator to monitor the engine's fuel consumption and compare it to fuel consumption listed in the airplane flight manual. If a fuel monitoring system is installed that automatically controls the engine or helps the pilot to properly lean the fuel mixture, then engine operation would be optimized and the direct operating costs would go down through reduced fuel consumption. Reciprocating engines run better if the fuel to air mixture is leaned out according to the optimum (manufacturer's) specified setting. Furthermore, fuel flow also rotates to power, and pilots can use fuel flow readings to quickly access the health of their engine during critical phases of flight, such as takeoff.

 Comprehensive engine monitors and redesigned electronic engine instrument displays are also being used in experimental aircraft. The FAA should encourage airplane manufacturers to utilize new technology to improve operation and reduce operating costs. New engine monitoring systems may improve reliability and engine life resulting in increased safety.

 The proposal would achieve the same safety objective as the current rule; the crew would have sufficient warning of any negative trend that could lead to partial or total engine failure. However, the proposal recognizes that this objective can be achieved by measuring fuel pressure, fuel flow, or with a "smart" fuel monitoring system.

International Compatibility

 The agency has reviewed corresponding International Civil Aviation Organization international standards and recommended practices and Joint Aviation Authorities requirements for compatibility.

Paperwork Reduction Act

 In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1990 (44 U.S.C. 3501 at seq.), there are no reporting or recordkeeping requirements associated with this proposed rule.

Regulatory Evaluation Summary

 Proposed changes to federal regulations must undergo several economic analyses. First, Executive Order 12866 directs Federal agencies to promulgate new regulations or modify existing regulations only if the potential benefits to society outweigh the potential costs. Second, the Regulatory Flexibility Act 0f 1980 requires agencies to analyze the economic impact of regulatory change son small entities. Finally, the Office of Management and Budget directs agencies to assess the effects of regulatory change son international trade. In conducting these analyses, the FAA has determined that this rule: (1) Would generate benefits exceeding its costs and is not significant as defined in Executive Order 12866; (2) is not significant as defined in DOT'S Policies and Procedures; (3) would not have a significant economic impact on small entities; and (4) would not affect international trade. These analyses, available in the docket, are summarized below.

Cost-Benefit Analysis

 Since the proposed rule would permit but not require alternative means of warning pilots of fuel system problems, it is inherently cost-beneficial. To the extent that it would encourage the development and utilization of comprehensive engine control, monitoring and diagnostic systems in the future, it would contribute benefits in the form of enhanced safety, improved fuel efficiency, power output, and engine life.

Regulatory Flexibility Determination

 The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA) was enacted by Congress to ensure that small entities are not unnecessarily and disproportionately burdened by government regulations. The RFA requires a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis if a rule would have a significant economic impact, either detrimental or beneficial, on a substantial number of small entities. Based on criteria in FAA Order 2100.14A, Regulatory Flexibility Criteria and guidance, the FAA has determined that the proposed rule would not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small manufacturers or operators.

International Trade Impact Assessment

 The proposed rule would not constitute a barrier to international trade, including the export of U.S. airplanes to foreign markets or the import of foreign airplanes into the United States.

Federalism Implications

 The regulations proposed herein would not have substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12866, it is determined that this proposal would not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.

Conclusion

 The FAA proposes to amend the airworthiness standards to allow airplane manufacturers to utilize new technology for fuel system monitoring to improve the operation and economy of part 23 airplanes powered by pump-fed engines. The current requirements provide for a fuel pressure indication; it, thus, limits the means of compliance. The advances in automobile engine monitoring systems and electronics offer technology that should be utilized by the aviation community. By broadening this airworthiness standard, fuel flow indicators or new fuel system monitors may be utilized that will provide more useful information to the pilot.

 For the reasons discussed in the preamble, and based on the findings in the Regulatory Flexibility Determination and the International Trade Impact Analysis, the FAA has determined that this proposed regulation is not significant under Executive Order 12866. In addition, the FAA certifies that this proposal, if adopted, will not have a significant economic impact, positive or negative, on a substantial number of small entities under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act This proposal is not considered significant under DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979). An initial regulatory evaluation of the proposal, including a Regulatory Flexibility Determination and Trade Impact Analysis, has been placed in the docket. A copy may be obtained by contacting the person identified under FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 23

 Aircraft, Air transportation, Aviation safety, Safety.

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: The Proposed Amendment: In consideration of the foregoing, the Federal Aviation Administration proposes to amend part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part 23) as follows:

Part 23-Airworthiness Standards; Normal, Utility, Acrobatic, And Commuter Category Airplanes 

1. The authority citation for part 23 continues to read as follows:

Authority: 49 U.S.C. 1344, 1354(a), 1355, 1421, 1423, 1425, 1428, 1429, 1430; 49 U.S.C. 106(g).

2. Section 23.1305 is amended by revising paragraph (b)(4) to read as follows:

Sec. 23.1305 Powerplant Instruments.

* * * * *

(b) * * *

(4) For each pump-fed engine, a means:

(i) That continuously indicates, to the pilot, the fuel pressure or fuel flow; or

(ii) That continuously monitors the fuel system and warns the pilot of any trend that could lead to engine failure.

* * * * *

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Washington, DC, on December 21, 1994.

Elizabeth Yoest

Acting Director, Aircraft Certification Service.

[FR Doc. 94-31913 Filed 12-27-94; 8:45 am]

BILLING CODE 4910-13-M

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.