CFR NPRM: Part 23

 
 
        
CITATION: [Federal Register: March 21, 1984 (Volume 49, Number 56)]

 
        
PAGE NUMBER: [Page 10622]

 
        
DOCKET NUMBER: 23826

 
        
14 CFR PARTS: Part 23

 
        
SUBJECT: Airworthiness Standards: Normal, Utility and Acrobatic Category Airplanes

 
        
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 
        
SUMMARY: This notice proposes to amend the airworthiness requirements of Part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for single-engine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes to include whirl mode instability analysis and test as one of the dynamic evaluations associated with freedom from flutter, control reversal, and divergence. Single-engine turbopropeller-powered airplanes are now being manufactured, and the FAA has determined such dynamic evaluations are necessary. The proposal, if adopted, will establish a level of safety for powerplant installations in single-engine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes consistent with that already established for multiengine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes.

 
        
DATES: Comments must be received on or before June 19, 1984.

 
        
ADDRESSES: Comments on this notice may be mailed in duplicate to: Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel, Attn: Rules Docket (AGC-204), Docket No. 23826, 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, D.C. 20591, or delivered in duplicate to: Room 916, 800 Independence Avenue. SW., Washington, D.C. 20591 Comments delivered must be marked: Docket No. 23826. Comments may be inspected in Room 916 between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. weekdays, except on Federal holidays.

 
        
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: William Olson, Regulations and Policy Office (ACE-110), Aircraft Certification Division, Central Region, Federal Aviation Administration, 601 East 12th Street, Kansas City, Missouri 64106; Telephone (816) 374-5688. 

 
        
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 

Comments Invited

 Interested persons are invited to participate in the making of the proposed rule by submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire. Communications should identify the regulatory docket or notice number and be submitted in duplicate to the address specified above. All communications received on or before the closing date for comments specified above will be considered by the Administrator before taking further rulemaking action. Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledge receipt of comments submitted in response to this notice must include a self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement is made: Comments to Docket No. 23826." The postcard will be date/time stamped and returned to the commenter. All comments received will be available, both before and after the closing date for comments, in the Rules Docket for examination by interested persons. A report summarizing each substantive public contact with FAA personnel concerned with this rulemaking will be filed in the docket.

Availability of NPRM

 Any person may obtain a copy of this NPRM by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of Public Affairs, Attn: Public Information Center, (APA-430), 800 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, D.C. 20591 or by calling (202) 426-8058. Communications must identify the notice number of this NPRM. Persons interested in being placed on the mailing list for future NPRMs should also request a copy of Advisory Circular No. 11-2, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Distribution System, which describes the application procedure.

Background

 Propeller whirl flutter is an aeroelastic instability that can occur in an airplane with a flexible engine installation. While such instability was predicted as early as 1938, it was not likely to be encountered in the low-speed range and low power airplanes of that era. Consequently, designers considered, for propeller-driven airplanes, the mass of the engine-propeller combination and the natural frequencies of its suspension, but not the elastic, inertia, and aerodynamic forces associated with the rotations and displacements of the plane of the propeller.

 During 1959 and 1960, two fatal accidents involving four-engine, turbopropeller airplanes focused particular attention on the hazards associated with aeroelastic instabilities in transport category airplanes. Subsequently, the regulations for transport category airplanes were amended to include investigations of the various forces with the rotations in and out of the plane of the propeller in evaluating airplane freedom from flutter.

 When turbopropeller engines were first installed on small, multiengine airplanes, special conditions were written to include a dynamic evaluation of whirl mode degrees of freedom. The analysis accounted for the aeroelastic stability of the plane of rotation of the propeller and significant elastic, inertial, and aerodynamic forces as well as powerplant (from propeller to airplane structure) stiffness and damping variations appropriate to the particular configuration. Then, in 1969, the rules for the type certification of small multiengine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes were amended to include these dynamic evaluations of the possible whirl mode aeroelastic instabilities in the flutter analysis to show freedom from flutter.

 Turbopropeller installations are becoming increasingly common on single-engine airplanes and a turbopropeller, wherever installed on an airplane, can exhibit unstable oscillatory motion resulting from combined aerodynamic, inertial, and gyroscopic modes. Special conditions have been issued to cover these requirements for single-engine airplanes with turbopropeller engines. This Notice proposes to codify the dynamic stability evaluation now required for multiengine small airplanes to include single-engine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes, and, in so doing, and the practice of imposing this single-engine requirement by special condition.

Discussion of Proposal

 Because of their unique characteristics, turbopropeller engine installations require special consideration. If damping and aerodynamic forces are not considered and the structure allows angular deflections, the spinning propeller could behave like a gyroscopic pendulum. As an example, if the system were released from an initial pitch deflection, the resulting angular velocity as the system springs back would induce a gyroscopic moment about the yaw axis. This moment would, in turn, cause the system to yaw, inducing a pitching moment, and so on. This, in a flexible system it is very significant that gyroscopic action of the rotating propeller couples with natural pitch and yaw modes, causing a precession motion about the axis of the undisturbed system. This gyroscopic action by itself cannot lead to a divergent type whirl mode instability because the new energy input to the system is zero. However, when the resultant air stream is misaligned from the propeller rotation axis due to an angular displacement or a transverse linear velocity of the propeller axis, certain forces and moments are generated. As an example if the axis is deflected in pitch, a vertical lift force together with a yawing moment is developed by the propeller which, for small deflections, is proportional to the pitch angle.

 During the 1960's, several reciprocating engine-powered, single-engine airplane models were converted to turbopropeller power and were approved without a required whirl mode evaluation. These airplanes have been flying without adverse service experience with regard to flutter. More recently, however, an applicant conducted a whirl mode investigation and, based on the findings, stiffened the engine mount before certificating the airplane. This occurrence, and characteristics typical to turbopropeller engine installations, concerned the FAA because the applicable airworthiness standards did not envision the novel and unusual features associated with single-engine, turbopropeller installations. As a result, the FAA has subsequently issued special conditions to require a whirl mode evaluation on all new certification projects involving turbopropeller engine installations.

 On a typical conversion from reciprocating to turbopropeller propulsion in a single-engine airplane, the lighter weight powerplant is usually moved forward to maintain the center of gravity between established limits. While the new longer engine mount could meet requirements for engine support, thrust, and torque loads, it could be more flexible than the structure it replaced, to the point where propeller whirl flutter could occur.

 In like manner, the fuselage of a new single-engine tractor turbopropeller airplane could be slimmed in profile to accommodate a smaller frontal area engine, lightened in structure to support less engine weight, and made rigid enough to absorb engine thrust and torque loads, but, at the same time, be too flexible to prevent propeller whirl mode flutter.

 Another area in which flutter evaluation is of concern to the FAA is the empennage of single-engine, pusher, turbopropeller-powered airplanes. Several new airplanes of this type are now under development and, in this configuration, empennage motion may be as significantly influenced by loads from the propeller as wing motion is influenced in multiengine, turbopropeller airplanes.

 The present wording of Sec. 23.629 (e)(2) of the FAR, "Engine-propeller-nacelle stiffness" places undue emphasis on engine mount and propeller hub flexibility with regard to the whirl mode analysis. In actuality, the airplane normal modes include airplane flexibility as well as flexibilities associated with the powerplant installation. Also, the word "nacelle" in Sec. 23.629 (e)(2) implies stiffness in an engine enclosure whose main purpose is reducing drag. Accordingly, a change is proposed for Sec. 23.629 (e)(2) to resolve this ambiguity by referring to propeller, engine, engine mount, and airplane structure stiffness for the required dynamic evaluation.

 Present Sec. 23.629 (e) limits whirl mode requirements to multiengine, turbopropeller-powered airplanes. Accordingly, it is proposed to amend Sec. 23.629 (e) to include all turbopropeller powered airplanes.

Economic Evaluation

 In compliance with Executive Order 12291, 46 FR 13193 (1981), the FAA has determined that this proposal, if adopted, will not be a "major rule" having an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more because it only codifies dynamic stability requirements of Sec. 23.629 that the FAA has been imposing by special conditions. It will not result in a major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individual, Federal, State, or local government agencies, or geographic regions; and it will not have significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on the ability of the United States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.

Regulatory Flexibility Act

 In addition to the reasons discussed earlier, the regulatory impact of showing compliance with this proposed requirement is minimal in that the whirl mode evaluation only has to be conducted once for a specific airplane model and the expected cost is less than that considered significant on an annual basis, and the final rule is not expected to have subsequent secondary or incidental effects on a substantial number of small entities.

 Because this proposed rule, if adopted, will not have a significant impact on a substantial number of small entities, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis will not be prepared.

List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 23

 Aircraft, Aviation safety, Air transportation, Tires.

Part 23 -Airworthiness Standards: Normal, Utility, And Acrobatic Category Airplanes

 
        
REGULATORY TEXT: The Proposed Amendment

Accordingly, the Federal Aviation Administration proposes to amend Part 23 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR Part 23) as follows:

By revising Sec. 23.629 (e) introductory text and paragraph (e)(2) to read as follows:

Sec. 23.629 Flutter.

* * * * *

(e) For turbopropeller-powered airplanes, the dynamic evaluation must include -

* * * * *

(2) Propeller, engine, engine mount, and airplane structure stiffness and damping variations appropriate to the particular configuration.

* * * * *

(Sec. 313(a), 601 and 603 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended (49 U.S.C. 1354 (a), 1421 and 1423) and 49 U.S.C. 106 (g) (Revised Pub. L.97-449, Jan. 12, 1983) and 14 CFR, Sec. 11.45) 

Note. -For reasons discussed earlier in the preamble, the FAA has determined that this proposed requirement is not a major rule under provisions of Executive Order 12291, is not significant under the provisions of the Department of Transportation Regulatory Policies and Procedures [44 FR

11034; February 26, 1979], and the FAA certifies that the proposal, if promulgated will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities under provisions of the Regulatory Flexibility Act. In addition, this proposal if adopted, would have little or no impact on trade opportunities for U.S. firms doing business overseas, or for foreign firms doing business in the U.S. The draft evaluation prepared for this action is contained in the regulatory docket. A copy of it may be obtained by contacting the person under the caption "FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT".

 
        
FOOTER: Issued in Kansas City, Missouri, on November 18, 1983.

James O. Robinson,

Acting Director.

[FR Doc. 84-7488 Filed 3-20-84; 8:45 am]

BILLING CODE 4910-13-M

 
        
NPRM ACTIONS: Not Applicable.